[documentation]: Review ISI and WASM topics (#64)
hyperledger/iroha-2-docs: src/guide/advanced/isi.md

# Iroha Special Instructions

> The basic premise is; if the blockchain is the computer, then the client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The basic premise is; by mapping blockchain concepts onto computer concepts, the client
```

Author: ```suggestion
To understand how Iroha operates, let's draw parallels between a blockchain and a computer.
If the blockchain is the computer, then in this metaphor of ours the client
```

maybe like this?

Reviewer: Sounds good!

library (`iroha_client_cli` or any other) is the keyboard, the blockchain
is the hard drive, and the Iroha peer software is the processor. Like a
processor, Iroha accepts portable instructions that modify what's written
to the blockchain, allow certain users to use the network, and lock others
out.

Any operation that is run on-chain is written in terms of _Iroha Special

> Instructions (ISI)_, and there is no other way of modifying the world state

Author: ```suggestion
Instructions (ISI)_, and there is no other way of modifying the world state.
```

> that would pass consensus. To understand why, we'll need to make a short

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand why, we'll need to make a short
```

detour into how Iroha is implemented under the hood.

## How Iroha works

Each interaction with the blockchain is done via a _transaction_.

> Transaction is a collection of _instructions_, which are either glued

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A transaction is a collection of _instructions_, which are either glued
```

> together in sequence or called from a WASM blob (more on that later). You

Reviewer: ```suggestion
together in sequence or compiled into what we affectionately call a WASM blob (more on that later). You
```

need these instructions to register an account, remove an account, add X
amount of Y currency, and so on.

> You may also interact with the blockchain via _queries_, which you use to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To read the information encoded in the blocks of a blockchain (the current world state), you need to use _queries_. They are submitted like instructions, but they're not tracked and recorded in blocks, so they're much more lightweight. If the query is used for your information only there is no trace of queries in the blockchain, however if you use the query as part of complicated logic (inside e.g. WASM), they have a non-negligible impact on the size of the blocks. 
```

get some kind of information from the blockchain (only the information you
are allowed to access). Queries are also instructions.

### Consensus

Each time you send a transaction to Iroha, it gets put into a queue, and

> when the time comes, the queue is emptied, and the consensus process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when it's time to produce a new block, the queue is emptied, and the consensus process
```

> begins. This process is a bit of mundane with a bit of black magic[^1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
begins. This process is equal parts common sense and black magic[^1].
```

get committed to a block and consensus tries again.

The reasoning behind this algorithm is simple: if someone had some evil
peers and connected them to the existing network, if they tried to fake
data, some good™ peers would not get the same (evil™) world state. If
that's the case, the evil™ peers would not be allowed to participate in
consensus, and you would eventually produce a block using only good™ peers.

If any changes to the world state are made without Iroha Special
Instructions, they would not pass consensus and never get committed to a
block.

## Instructions

So what kinds of special instructions do we have? If you've read the
tutorial on [Rust](../rust.md) or [Python](../python.md), you've already
seen a couple of instructions: `Register<Account>` and `Mint<Quantity>`.

For the exhaustive list of Instructions you should consult
[our source code](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-dev/core/src/smartcontracts/isi).
Here we will cover only some important classes.

### (Un)Register

Registering and unregistering are the instructions used to give an ID to a
new entity on the blockchain.

Everything that can be registered is `Identifiable`, but not everything

> that's `Identifiable` can be registered. As a rule, everything that can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that's `Identifiable` is `Registrable`. Most things are registered directly, like `Peer`s, but in some cases the representation in the blockchain has considerably more data. For security and performance reasons, we use builders for such data structures (e.g. `NewAccount`). As a rule, everything that can be
```

# Iroha Special Instructions

To understand how Iroha operates, let's draw parallels between a blockchain
and a computer. If the blockchain is the computer, then in this metaphor of

> ours the client library (`iroha_client_cli` or any other) is the keyboard,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ours the client binary (for example: `iroha_client_cli`) is the keyboard,
```

modify what's written to the blockchain, allow certain users to use the
network, and lock others out.

Any operation that is run on-chain is written in terms of _Iroha Special
Instructions (ISI)_, and there is no other way of modifying the world
state. To understand why, we'll need to make a short detour into how Iroha
is implemented under the hood.

## How Iroha works

Each interaction with the blockchain is done via a _transaction_. A
transaction is a collection of _instructions_, which are either glued
together in sequence or compiled into what we affectionately call a WASM
blob (more on that later). You need these instructions to register an
account, remove an account, add X amount of Y currency, and so on.

To read the information encoded in the blocks of a blockchain (the current
world state), you use _queries_. Queries are submitted like instructions,
but they're not tracked and recorded in blocks, so they're much more
lightweight. If you use queries as part of complicated logic (e.g. inside
WASM), they have a non-negligible impact on the size of the blocks. Queries
that are only used to get information leave no trace in the blockchain.

### Consensus

> Each time you send a transaction to Iroha, it gets put into a queue, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each time you send a transaction to Iroha, it gets put into a queue,
```

> Each time you send a transaction to Iroha, it gets put into a queue, and
> when it's time to produce a new block, the queue is emptied, and the

Author: ```suggestion
Each time you send a transaction to Iroha, it gets put into a queue.
When it's time to produce a new block, the queue is emptied, and the
```

consensus process begins. This process is equal parts common sense and
black magic[^1].

The mundane aspect is that a special set of peers needs to take the

> transaction queue, and reproduce the same world state. If the world state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
transaction queue and reproduce the same world state. If the world state
```

will expire once all `X` operations were performed.

By contrast, a `Grant` operation can be used to grant either a single
permission, or a group of permissions (or a "role"), to a user permanently.
As such these instructions should be used carefully.
By contrast, the `Grant` operation can be used to permanently grant a user
either a single permission, or a group of permissions (a "role"). As such
these instructions should be used carefully.

### `SetKeyValue`/`RemoveKeyValue`

These instructions are used with the key/value store asset type. This use
These instructions are used with the key/value `Store` asset type. This use
case has not received much attention so far, because storing data in the
blockchain is rather advanced topic that we shall cover separately.
blockchain is a rather advanced topic that we shall cover separately.

### Query

These are all the queries that can be made from the client side. This is
not necessarily the only kind of information that is available on the
network, but it's the only kind of information that is guaranteed to be
accessible on all networks. Telemetry data is optional to the specific

> deployment of Iroha. Access to your account balance is required function.

Author: tbh this part seemed a bit out of place here. It says "These are all the queries...", and I'm not sure what "these" refer to, I've tried working around this but I'm not sure I got it right

Reviewer: I moved the queries into their own file, but forgot to remove the reference. You did the right thing.

> your account balance is required function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your account balance is a required function.
```

### Grant/Revoke

These are used specifically for permissions. When minting a permission
token, a user is granted `X` amount of permissions to do `Y`, and the token
will expire once all `X` operations were performed.

By contrast, the `Grant` operation can be used to permanently grant a user
either a single permission, or a group of permissions (a "role"). As such
these instructions should be used carefully.

### `SetKeyValue`/`RemoveKeyValue`

These instructions are used with the key/value `Store` asset type. This use
case has not received much attention so far, because storing data in the
blockchain is a rather advanced topic that we shall cover separately.

### Query

We talk extensively about queries in the [dedicated section](queries.md)

> where we list all the queries that can be made from the client side. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where all the queries that can be made from the client-side are listed. This
```
